In this video we'll learn about storage virtualization and how storage resources are presented to your
virtual machines.
So a virtual machine is similar to a physical machine.
In many ways it's got an operating system installed on it.
And in this particular case it's got Windows installed on it and it needs access to you memory network
storage and the operating system does not know that it's running within a virtual machine.
So our goal here is to basically trick the guest operating system into thinking that it has real hardware
so will provide access to memory CPQ storage and networking resources and essentially the goal here
is to trick the virtual machine into thinking that these are just normal physical resources.
So from the perspective of the virtual machine and windows in this case Windows needs to see drives.
When I'm working in the Windows operating system and I'm saving a file or making some sort of change
those changes need to be written to a drive via a scuzzy command.
And so as far as the Windows operating system is concerned it needs to see just regular old desks and
a scuzzy controller just like a physical Windows machine with see.
So here on the far left we see in our little purple box we've got a Windows VM and the Windows virtual
machine executes some sort of scuzzy command.
And we see here it's got a virtual scuzzy controller.
So Windows has drivers and it appears to Windows like there's a physical hardware scuzzy controller.
So when Windows has a scuzzy command that needs to be written to the C-Drive it'll send that scuzzy
command to the Scace controller.
And if this were to be a physical system that's because the controller would communicate with the local
physical disks.
But this isn't a physical machine.
This is a virtual machine.
And so when those scuzzy commands are generated and sent to this virtual scuzzy controller they're actually
being pumped into our hypervisor and our hypervisor is what presents all of the virtual hardware to
our virtual machine.
It's this layer of abstraction between the virtual machine and the actual hardware.
And what it essentially does is it decouples the virtual machine from the hardware.
Right here we see we have one storage adapter shown on the screen here but there might be multiple storage
adapters as well.
Right.
And there might be multiple physical storage systems that they communicate with.
None of this really matters to the virtual machine.
Right.
The hypervisor can redirect those storage operations to different areas but the virtual machine will
never be any the wiser and will have no idea where those storage commands are actually going.
It doesn't know if this is a fiber channel storage or it doesn't know if this is I scuzzy Windows has
no awareness of any of that.
So we're decoupling the physical storage from the virtual machine and all the virtual machine sees is
a virtual scuzzy controller in a C drive or a D drive or whatever drive it happens to be writing to.
So those scuzzy commands flow out of the operating system through that virtual scuzzy controller and
the hypervisor takes over from there and directs them to the appropriate storage location
and the storage location.
In this case is a VMT OK.
That's a virtual disk.
So for every C drive and D drive and drive and every virtual device that a VM has it's backed by a VM
decay file stored on a data store somewhere.
So as those scuzzy commands get issued by Windows this virtual machine has a VM decay file that the
ESX host is aware of and that the ESX I host knows where that VM decay file resides.
And so those changes those scuzzy commands are going to be pumped over some sort of storage network
towards that VM DK file.
And in that manner the changes made by the guest operating system are relate to the virtual disk of
that virtual machine.
Now when it comes to our VMT KS And we have a couple options right.
And let's say that we've created this Windows virtual machine and when you're configuring your VM and
setting it up you can choose how big you want the virtual desk to be and you can choose whether you
want that virtual desk to be thin or thick provisioned.
So in this case let's assume that when we are creating our VM we gave it an 80 gig virtual this right
but so far we're only actually storing 40 gigs of data right.
So it's just like any other Windows machine.
It might have an 80 gig disk but windows and whatever else we're storing on that desk might not add
up to 80 gigs.
It might be less.
So the actual data that's being stored by this VM is only 40 gigs or even though we've given an 80 gig
desk.
If we're using a thin previsions disk that gives us some efficiency here because there is 40 gigs of
actual data Well that's the only space that will actually get consumed on the data store.
So we don't immediately consume all of the space that's allocated to this VM on the data store.
It's a much more efficient way to operate if Windows only needs to store 40 gigs of data that's all
the space that will be consumed on the data store.
And that's what a thin previsions desk is a thick provision desk is a little bit different.
If I create an 80 gig thick provision desk it is immediately going to consume 80 gigs of space.
The data store.
So why would I ever go with a thick previsions desk.
Well we now know that a thin provision desk saves space it's very efficient whereas a thick provision
desk allocates 100 percent of the space upfront.
And before that space can be used.
Right.
Whether we're talking about thin or thick provisioned disks before any of this space can be used the
blocks that make up that space have to have zeros written to them.
So if my Virtu machine is about to write some new data to this VMT K and it's about to send some sort
of you know new new data here the blocks that it's going to right to have to have all zeros written
to them first.
And this can take a little time.
This is going to consume some storage resources.
The actual process of writing out those zeros.
So if we are working with the thin provisioned disk none of those blocks are zeroed when the disk is
created.
So every time we need to write to a new block of a thin provision to disk there's going to be a little
bit of a delay there as that block is zeroed out but thick provision desks have all zeros written upfront
when they're created.
So they're not going to have to complete that zeroing operation when new data is going to be run.
So for this reason thick provisioned eager zeroed virtual disks are recommended for VM with write intensive
work load things like sequel virtual machines or Sharepoint via apps.
OK so in this lesson we learned that virtual machines are presented virtual hardware and the guest OS
is not aware that it's running on a virtual machine.
The guest OS just sees a virtualise versions of hardware that it thinks are real.
We learned that thin provision disks are space efficient but they don't have the same performance characteristics
of a thick provisioned eager zero desk.
So those thin pervasion disks are useful in many cases and their performance is fine in most situations.
But if you have like a sequel database or a share point or an exchange database availability group those
sorts of applications write a lot of new blocks and should be configured with thick provisioned eager
0 or disks.